EARLY POEMS.


AN EVENING WALK IN SPRING.

  It was but some few nights ago
    I wandered down this quiet lane;
  I pray that I may never know
    The feelings then I felt, again.
  The leaves were shining all about,
    You might almost have seen them springing;
  I heard the cuckoo’s simple shout,
    And all the little birds were singing.
  It was not dull, the air was clear,
    All lovely sights and sounds to deal,
  My eyes could see, my ears could hear,
    Only my heart, it would not feel;
  And yet that it should not be so,
    My mind kept telling me within;
  Though nought was wrong that I did know,
    I thought I must have done some sin.
  For I am sure as I can be,
    That they who have been wont to look
  On all in Nature’s face they see,
    Even as in the Holy Book;
  They who with pure and humble eyes
    Have gazed and read her lessons high,
  And taught their spirits to be wise
    In love and human sympathy,—
  That they can soon and surely tell
    When aught has gone amiss within,
  When the mind is not sound and well,
    Nor the soul free from taint of sin.
  For as God’s Spirit from above,
    So Beauty is to them below,
  And when they slight that holy love,
    Their hearts that presence may not know.
  So I turned home the way I came,
    With downcast looks and heavy heart,
  A guilty thing and full of shame,
    With a dull grief that had no smart.
  It chanced when I was nearly there
    That all at once I raised my eyes—
  Was it a dream, or vision rare,
    That then they saw before them rise?
  I see it now, before me here,
    As often, often I have done,
  As bright as it could then appear,
    All shining in the setting sun.
  Elms, with their mantling foliage spread,
    And tall dark poplars rising out,
  And blossomed orchards, white and red,
    Cast, like a long low fence, about;
  And in the midst the grey church-tower,
    With one slight turret at its side,
  Bringing to mind with silent power
    Those thousand homes the elm-trees hide.
  And then there came the thought of one
    Who on his bed of sickness lay,
  Whilst I beneath the setting sun
    Was dreaming this sweet hour away.
  I thought of hearts for him that beat,
    Of aching eyes their watch that kept;
  The sister’s and the mother’s seat—
    And oh! I thought I should have wept.
  And oh! my spirit melted then,
    The weight fell off me that I bore,
  And now I felt in truth again
    The lovely things that stood before.
  O blessed, blessed scene, to thee,
    For that thy sweet and softening power,
  I could have fallen upon my knee,
    Thy stately elms, thy grey church-tower.
  So then I took my homeward way,
    My heart in sweet and holy frame,
  With spirit, I may dare to say,
    More good and soft than when I came.

  1836


_AN INCIDENT._

  ’Twas on a sunny summer day
    I trod a mighty city’s street,
  And when I started on my way
    My heart was full of fancies sweet;
  But soon, as nothing could be seen,
  But countenances sharp and keen,
  Nought heard or seen around but told
  Of something bought or something sold,
  And none that seemed to think or care
  That any save himself was there,—

  Full soon my heart began to sink
    With a strange shame and inward pain,
  For I was sad within to think
    Of this absorbing love of gain,
  And various thoughts my bosom tost;
  When suddenly my path there crossed,
  Locked hand in hand with one another,
  A little maiden and her brother—
  A little maiden, and she wore
  Around her waist a pinafore.

  And hand in hand along the street
    This pretty pair did softly go,
  And as they went, their little feet
    Moved in short even steps and slow:
  It was a sight to see and bless,
  That little sister’s tenderness;
  One hand a tidy basket bore
  Of flowers and fruit—a chosen store,
  Such as kind friends oft send to others—
  And one was fastened in her brother’s.

  It was a voice of meaning sweet,
    And spake amid that scene of strife
  Of home and homely duties meet,
    And charities of daily life;
  And often, should my spirit fail,
  And under cold strange glances quail,
  ’Mid busy shops and busier throng,
  That speed upon their ways along
  The thick and crowded thoroughfare,
  I’ll call to mind that little pair.

  1836


_THE THREAD OF TRUTH._

  Truth is a golden thread, seen here and there
  In small bright specks upon the visible side
  Of our strange being’s party-coloured web.
  How rich the converse! ’Tis a vein of ore
  Emerging now and then on Earth’s rude breast,
  But flowing full below. Like islands set
  At distant intervals on Ocean’s face,
  We see it on our course; but in the depths
  The mystic colonnade unbroken keeps
  Its faithful way, invisible but sure.
  Oh, if it be so, wherefore do we men
  Pass by so many marks, so little heeding?

  1839


_REVIVAL._

                          So I went wrong,
  Grievously wrong, but folly crushed itself,
  And vanity o’ertoppling fell, and time
  And healthy discipline and some neglect,
  Labour and solitary hours revived
  Somewhat, at least, of that original frame.
  Oh, well do I remember then the days
  When on some grassy slope (what time the sun
  Was sinking, and the solemn eve came down
  With its blue vapour upon field and wood
  And elm-embosomed spire) once more again
  I fed on sweet emotion, and my heart
  With love o’erflowed, or hushed itself in fear
  Unearthly, yea celestial. Once again
  My heart was hot within me, and, me seemed,
  I too had in my body breath to wind
  The magic horn of song; I too possessed
  Up-welling in my being’s depths a fount
  Of the true poet-nectar whence to fill
  The golden urns of verse.

  1839


_THE SHADY LANE._

  Whence comest thou, shady lane? and why and how?
  Thou, where with idle heart, ten years ago,
  I wandered, and with childhood’s paces slow
  So long unthought of, and remembered now!
  Again in vision clear thy pathwayed side
  I tread, and view thy orchard plots again
  With yellow fruitage hung,—and glimmering grain
  Standing or shocked through the thick hedge espied.
  This hot still noon of August brings the sight;
  This quelling silence as of eve or night,
  Wherein Earth (feeling as a mother may
  After her travail’s latest bitterest throes)
  Looks up, so seemeth it, one half repose,
  One half in effort, straining, suffering still.

  1839


_THE HIGHER COURAGE._[1]

  Come back again, my olden heart!—
    Ah, fickle spirit and untrue,
  I bade the only guide depart
    Whose faithfulness I surely knew:
  I said, my heart is all too soft;
  He who would climb and soar aloft
  Must needs keep ever at his side
  The tonic of a wholesome pride.

  Come back again, my olden heart!—
    Alas, I called not then for thee;
  I called for Courage, and apart
    From Pride if Courage could not be,
  Then welcome, Pride! and I shall find
  In thee a power to lift the mind
  This low and grovelling joy above—
  ’Tis but the proud can truly love.

  Come back again, my olden heart!—
    With incrustations of the years
  Uncased as yet,—as then thou wert,
    Full-filled with shame and coward fears:
  Wherewith amidst a jostling throng
  Of deeds, that each and all were wrong,
  The doubting soul, from day to day,
  Uneasy paralytic lay.

  Come back again, my olden heart!
    I said, Perceptions contradict,
  Convictions come, anon depart,
    And but themselves as false convict.
  Assumptions, hasty, crude and vain,
  Full oft to use will Science deign;
  The corks the novice plies to-day
  The swimmer soon shall cast away.

  Come back again, my olden heart!
    I said, Behold, I perish quite,
  Unless to give me strength to start,
    I make myself my rule of right:
  It must be, if I act at all,
  To save my shame I have at call
  The plea of all men understood,—
  Because I willed it, it is good.

  Come back again, my olden heart!
    I know not if in very deed
  This means alone could aid impart
    To serve my sickly spirit’s need;
  But clear alike of wild self-will,
  And fear that faltered, paltered still,
  Remorseful thoughts of after days
  A way espy betwixt the ways.

  Come back again, old heart! Ah me!
    Methinks in those thy coward fears
  There might, perchance, a courage be,
    That fails in these the manlier years;
  Courage to let the courage sink,
  Itself a coward base to think,
  Rather than not for heavenly light
  Wait on to show the truly right.

  1840


_WRITTEN ON A BRIDGE._

  When soft September brings again
    To yonder gorse its golden glow,
  And Snowdon sends its autumn rain
    To bid thy current livelier flow;
  Amid that ashen foliage light
  When scarlet beads are glistering bright,
  While alder boughs unchanged are seen
  In summer livery of green;
  When clouds before the cooler breeze
  Are flying, white and large; with these
  Returning, so may I return,
  And find thee changeless, Pont-y-wern.

  1840


_A RIVER POOL._

  Sweet streamlet bason! at thy side
  Weary and faint within me cried
  My longing heart,—In such pure deep
  How sweet it were to sit and sleep;
  To feel each passage from without
  Close up,—above me and about,
  Those circling waters crystal clear,
  That calm impervious atmosphere!
  There on thy pearly pavement pure,
  To lean, and feel myself secure,
  Or through the dim-lit inter-space,
  Afar at whiles upgazing trace
  The dimpling bubbles dance around
  Upon thy smooth exterior face;
  Or idly list the dreamy sound
  Of ripples lightly flung, above
  That home, of peace, if not of love.

  1840


_IN A LECTURE-ROOM._

  Away, haunt thou not me,
  Thou vain Philosophy!
  Little hast thou bestead,
  Save to perplex the head,
  And leave the spirit dead.
  Unto thy broken cisterns wherefore go,
  While from the secret treasure-depths below,
  Fed by the skiey shower,
  And clouds that sink and rest on hill-tops high,
  Wisdom at once, and Power,
  Are welling, bubbling forth, unseen, incessantly?
  Why labour at the dull mechanic oar,
  When the fresh breeze is blowing,
  And the strong current flowing,
  Right onward to the Eternal Shore?

  1840


‘_Blank Misgivings of a Creature moving about in Worlds not realised._’


I

  Here am I yet, another twelvemonth spent,
  One-third departed of the mortal span,
  Carrying on the child into the man,
  Nothing into reality. Sails rent,
  And rudder broken,—reason impotent,—
  Affections all unfixed; so forth I fare
  On the mid seas unheedingly, so dare
  To do and to be done by, well content.
  So was it from the first, so is it yet;
  Yea, the first kiss that by these lips was set
  On any human lips, methinks was sin—
  Sin, cowardice, and falsehood; for the will
  Into a deed e’en then advanced, wherein
  God, unidentified, was thought-of still.


II

  Though to the vilest things beneath the moon
  For poor Ease’ sake I give away my heart,
  And for the moment’s sympathy let part
  My sight and sense of truth, Thy precious boon,
  My painful earnings, lost, all lost, as soon,
  Almost, as gained; and though aside I start,
  Belie Thee daily, hourly,—still Thou art,
  Art surely as in heaven the sun at noon;
  How much so e’er I sin, whate’er I do
  Of evil, still the sky above is blue,
  The stars look down in beauty as before:
  It is enough to walk as best we may,
  To walk, and, sighing, dream of that blest day
  When ill we cannot quell shall be no more.


III

  Well, well,—Heaven bless you all from day to day!
  Forgiveness too, or e’er we part, from each,
  As I do give it, so must I beseech:
  I owe all much, much more than I can pay;
  Therefore it is I go; how could I stay
  Where every look commits me to fresh debt,
  And to pay little I must borrow yet?
  Enough of this already, now away!
  With silent woods and hills untenanted
  Let me go commune; under thy sweet gloom,
  O kind maternal Darkness, hide my head:
  The day may come I yet may re-assume
  My place, and, these tired limbs recruited, seek
  The task for which I now am all too weak.


IV

  Yes, I have lied, and so must walk my way,
  Bearing the liar’s curse upon my head;
  Letting my weak and sickly heart be fed
  On food which does the present craving stay,
  But may be clean-denied me e’en to-day,
  And tho’ ’twere certain, yet were ought but bread;
  Letting—for so they say, it seems, I said,
  And I am all too weak to disobey!
  Therefore for me sweet Nature’s scenes reveal not
  Their charm; sweet Music greets me and I feel not
  Sweet eyes pass off me uninspired; yea, more,
  The golden tide of opportunity
  Flows wafting-in friendships and better,—I
  Unseeing, listless, pace along the shore.


V

  How often sit I, poring o’er
    My strange distorted youth,
  Seeking in vain, in all my store,
    One feeling based on truth;
  Amid the maze of petty life
    A clue whereby to move,
  A spot whereon in toil and strife
    To dare to rest and love.
  So constant as my heart would be,
    So fickle as it must,
  ’Twere well for others as for me
    ’Twere dry as summer dust.
  Excitements come, and act and speech
    Flow freely forth;—but no,
  Nor they, nor ought beside can reach
    The buried world below.

  1841


VI

                  ——Like a child
  In some strange garden left awhile alone,
  I pace about the pathways of the world,
  Plucking light hopes and joys from every stem
  With qualms of vague misgiving in my heart
  That payment at the last will be required,
  Payment I cannot make, or guilt incurred,
  And shame to be endured.

  1841


VII

                ——Roused by importunate knocks
  I rose, I turned the key, and let them in,
  First one, anon another, and at length
  In troops they came; for how could I, who once
  Had let in one, nor looked him in the face,
  Show scruples e’er again? So in they came,
  A noisy band of revellers,—vain hopes,
  Wild fancies, fitful joys; and there they sit
  In my heart’s holy place, and through the night
  Carouse, to leave it when the cold grey dawn
  Gleams from the East, to tell me that the time
  For watching and for thought bestowed is gone.

  1841


VIII

  O kind protecting Darkness! as a child
  Flies back to bury in its mother’s lap
  His shame and his confusion, so to thee,
  O Mother Night, come I! within the folds
  Of thy dark robe hide thou me close; for I
  So long, so heedless, with external things
  Have played the liar, that whate’er I see,
  E’en these white glimmering curtains, yon bright stars,
  Which to the rest rain comfort down, for me
  Smiling those smiles, which I may not return,
  Or frowning frowns of fierce triumphant malice,
  As angry claimants or expectants sure
  Of that I promised and may not perform,
  Look me in the face! O hide me, Mother Night!

  1841


IX

  Once more the wonted road I tread,
  Once more dark heavens above me spread,
  Upon the windy down I stand,
  My station whence the circling land
  Lies mapped and pictured wide below;—
  Such as it was, such e’en again,
  Long dreary bank, and breadth of plain
  By hedge or tree unbroken;—lo!
  A few grey woods can only show
  How vain their aid, and in the sense
  Of one unaltering impotence,
  Relieving not, meseems enhance
  The sovereign dulness of the expanse.
  Yet marks where human hand hath been,
  Bare house, unsheltered village, space
  Of ploughed and fenceless tilth between
  (Such aspect as methinks may be
  In some half-settled colony),
  From Nature vindicate the scene;
  A wide, and yet disheartening view,
  A melancholy world.

                        ’Tis true,
  Most true; and yet, like those strange smiles
  By fervent hope or tender thought
  From distant happy regions brought,
  Which upon some sick bed are seen
  To glorify a pale worn face
  With sudden beauty,—so at whiles
  Lights have descended, hues have been,
  To clothe with half-celestial grace
  The bareness of the desert place.

  Since so it is, so be it still!
  Could only thou, my heart, be taught
  To treasure, and in act fulfil
  The lesson which the sight has brought:
  In thine own dull and dreary state
  To work and patiently to wait:
  Little thou think’st in thy despair
  How soon the o’ershaded sun may shine,
  And e’en the dulling clouds combine
  To bless with lights and hues divine
  That region desolate and bare,
  Those sad and sinful thoughts of thine!

  Still doth the coward heart complain;
  The hour may come, and come in vain;
  The branch that withered lies and dead
  No suns can force to lift its head.
  True!—yet how little thou canst tell
  How much in thee is ill or well;
  Nor for thy neighbour nor for thee,
  Be sure, was life designed to be
  A draught of dull complacency.
  One Power too is it, who doth give
  The food without us, and within
  The strength that makes it nutritive;
  He bids the dry bones rise and live,
  And e’en in hearts depraved to sin
  Some sudden, gracious influence,
  May give the long-lost good again,
  And wake within the dormant sense
  And love of good;—for mortal men,
  So but thou strive, thou soon shalt see
  Defeat itself is victory.

  So be it: yet, O Good and Great,
  In whom in this bedarkened state
  I fain am struggling to believe,
  Let me not ever cease to grieve,
  Nor lose the consciousness of ill
  Within me;—and refusing still
  To recognise in things around
  What cannot truly there be found,
  Let me not feel, nor be it true,
  That, while each daily task I do,
  I still am giving day by day
  My precious things within away
  (Those thou didst give to keep as thine)
  And casting, do whate’er I may,
  My heavenly pearls to earthly swine.

  1841


_A SONG OF AUTUMN._

  My wind is turned to bitter north,
    That was so soft a south before;
  My sky, that shone so sunny bright,
    With foggy gloom is clouded o’er:
  My gay green leaves are yellow-black,
    Upon the dank autumnal floor;
  For love, departed once, comes back
    No more again, no more.

  A roofless ruin lies my home,
    For winds to blow and rains to pour;
  One frosty night befell, and lo!
    I find my summer days are o’er:
  The heart bereaved, of why and how
    Unknowing, knows that yet before
  It had what e’en to Memory now
    Returns no more, no more.


  I have seen higher, holier things than these,
    And therefore must to these refuse my heart,
  Yet am I panting for a little ease;
    I’ll take, and so depart.

  Ah, hold! the heart is prone to fall away,
    Her high and cherished visions to forget,
  And if thou takest, how wilt thou repay
    So vast, so dread a debt?

  How will the heart, which now thou trustest, then
    Corrupt, yet in corruption mindful yet,
  Turn with sharp stings upon itself! Again,
    Bethink thee of the debt!

  —Hast thou seen higher, holier things than these,
    And therefore must to these thy heart refuse?
  With the true best, alack, how ill agrees
    That best that thou would’st choose!

  The Summum Pulchrum rests in heaven above;
    Do thou, as best thou may’st, thy duty do:
  Amid the things allowed thee live and love;
    Some day thou shalt it view.

  1841

  If, when in cheerless wanderings, dull and cold,
  A sense of human kindliness hath found us,
        We seem to have around us
        An atmosphere all gold,
  ’Midst darkest shades a halo rich of shine,
  An element, that while the bleak wind bloweth,
        On the rich heart bestoweth
        Imbreathèd draughts of wine;
  Heaven guide, the cup be not, as chance may be,
  To some vain mate given up as soon as tasted!
        No, nor on thee be wasted,
        Thou trifler, Poesy!
  Heaven grant the manlier heart, that timely, ere
  Youth fly, with life’s real tempest would be coping;
        The fruit of dreamy hoping
        Is, waking, blank despair.

  1841


_THE SILVER WEDDING._[2]

  The Silver Wedding! on some pensive ear
    From towers remote as sound the silvery bells,
  To-day from one far unforgotten year
    A silvery faint memorial music swells.

  And silver-pale the dim memorial light
    Of musing age on youthful joys is shed,
  The golden joys of fancy’s dawning bright,
    The golden bliss of, Woo’d, and won, and wed.

  Ah, golden then, but silver now! In sooth,
    The years that pale the cheek, that dim the eyes,
  And silver o’er the golden hairs of youth,
    Less prized can make its only priceless prize.

  Not so; the voice this silver name that gave
    To this, the ripe and unenfeebled date,
  For steps together tottering to the grave,
    Hath bid the perfect golden title wait.

  Rather, if silver this, if that be gold,
    From good to better changed on age’s track,
  Must it as baser metal be enrolled,
    That day of days, a quarter-century back.

  Yet ah, its hopes, its joys were golden too,
    But golden of the fairy gold of dreams:
  To feel is but to dream; until we do,
    There’s nought that is, and all we see but seems.

  What was or seemed it needed cares and tears,
    And deeds together done, and trials past,
  And all the subtlest alchemy of years,
    To change to genuine substance here at last.

  Your fairy gold is silver sure to-day;
    Your ore by crosses many, many a loss,
  As in refiners’ fires, hath purged away
    What erst it had of earthy human dross.

  Come years as many yet, and as they go,
    In human life’s great crucible shall they
  Transmute, so potent are the spells they know,
    Into pure gold the silver of to-day.

  Strange metallurge is human life! ’Tis true;
    And Use and Wont in many a gorgeous case
  Full specious fair for casual outward view
    Electrotype the sordid and the base.

  Nor lack who praise, avowed, the spurious ware,
    Who bid young hearts the one true love forego,
  Conceit to feed, or fancy light as air,
    Or greed of pelf and precedence and show.

  True, false, as one to casual eyes appear,
    To read men truly men may hardly learn;
  Yet doubt it not that wariest glance would here
    Faith, Hope and Love, the true Tower-stamp discern.

  Come years again! as many yet! and purge
    Less precious earthier elements away,
  And gently changed at life’s extremest verge,
    Bring bright in gold your perfect fiftieth day!

  That sight may children see and parents show!
    If not—yet earthly chains of metal true,
  By love and duty wrought and fixed below,
    Elsewhere will shine, transformed, celestial-new;

  Will shine of gold, whose essence, heavenly bright,
    No doubt-damps tarnish, worldly passions fray;
  Gold into gold there mirrored, light in light,
    Shall gleam in glories of a deathless day.

  1845


_THE MUSIC OF THE WORLD AND OF THE SOUL._


I

  Why should I say I see the things I see not?
        Why be and be not?
  Show love for that I love not, and fear for what I fear not?
  And dance about to music that I hear not?
        Who standeth still i’ the street
        Shall be hustled and justled about;
  And he that stops i’ the dance shall be spurned by the dancers’ feet,—
  Shall be shoved and be twisted by all he shall meet,
        And shall raise up an outcry and rout;
          And the partner, too,—
          What’s the partner to do?
  While all the while ’tis but, perchance, an humming in mine ear,
        That yet anon shall hear,
        And I anon, the music in my soul,
        In a moment read the whole;
        The music in my heart,
        Joyously take my part,
  And hand in hand, and heart with heart, with these retreat, advance;
        And borne on wings of wavy sound,
        Whirl with these around, around,
    Who here are living in the living dance!
        Why forfeit that fair chance?
        Till that arrive, till thou awake,
        Of these, my soul, thy music make,
        And keep amid the throng,
  And turn as they shall turn, and bound as they are bounding,—
  Alas! alas! alas! and what if all along
        The music is not sounding?


II

  Are there not, then, two musics unto men?—
      One loud and bold and coarse,
      And overpowering still perforce
      All tone and tune beside;
      Yet in despite its pride
  Only of fumes of foolish fancy bred,
  And sounding solely in the sounding head:
      The other, soft and low,
      Stealing whence we not know,
  Painfully heard, and easily forgot,
  With pauses oft and many a silence strange
  (And silent oft it seems, when silent it is not),
  Revivals too of unexpected change:
  Haply thou think’st ’twill never be begun,
  Or that ’t has come, and been, and passed away:
      Yet turn to other none,—
      Turn not, oh, turn not thou!
  But listen, listen, listen,—if haply be heard it may;
  Listen, listen, listen,—is it not sounding now?


III

  Yea, and as thought of some departed friend
  By death or distance parted will descend,
  Severing, in crowded rooms ablaze with light,
  As by a magic screen, the seër from the sight
  (Palsying the nerves that intervene
  The eye and central sense between);
      So may the ear,
      Hearing not hear,
  Though drums do roll, and pipes and cymbals ring;
  So the bare conscience of the better thing
  Unfelt, unseen, unimaged, all unknown,
  May fix the entrancèd soul ’mid multitudes alone.


_LOVE, NOT DUTY._

  Thought may well be ever ranging,
  And opinion ever changing,
  Task-work be, though ill begun,
  Dealt with by experience better;
  By the law and by the letter
  Duty done is duty done:
  Do it, Time is on the wing!

  Hearts, ’tis quite another thing,
  Must or once for all be given,
  Or must not at all be given;
  Hearts, ’tis quite another thing!

  To bestow the soul away
  Is an idle duty-play!—
  Why, to trust a life-long bliss
  To caprices of a day,
  Scarce were more depraved than this!

  Men and maidens, see you mind it;
  Show of love, where’er you find it,
  Look if duty lurk behind it!
  Duty-fancies, urging on
  Whither love had never gone!

  Loving—if the answering breast
  Seem not to be thus possessed,
  Still in hoping have a care;
  If it do, beware, beware!
  But if in yourself you find it,
  Above all things—mind it, mind it!

  1841


_LOVE AND REASON._

  When panting sighs the bosom fill,
  And hands by chance united thrill
  At once with one delicious pain
  The pulses and the nerves of twain;
  When eyes that erst could meet with ease,
  Do seek, yet, seeking, shyly shun
  Extatic conscious unison,—
  The sure beginnings, say, be these
  Prelusive to the strain of love
  Which angels sing in heaven above?

    Or is it but the vulgar tune,
  Which all that breathe beneath the moon
  So accurately learn—so soon?
  With variations duly blent;
  Yet that same song to all intent,
  Set for the finer instrument;
  It is; and it would sound the same
  In beasts, were not the bestial frame,
  Less subtly organised, to blame;
  And but that soul and spirit add
  To pleasures, even base and bad,
  A zest the soulless never had.

    It may be—well indeed I deem;
  But what if sympathy, it seem,
  And admiration and esteem,
  Commingling therewithal, do make
  The passion prized for Reason’s sake?
  Yet, when my heart would fain rejoice,
  A small expostulating voice
  Falls in; Of this thou wilt not take
  Thy one irrevocable choice?
  In accent tremulous and thin
  I hear high Prudence deep within,
  Pleading the bitter, bitter sting,
  Should slow-maturing seasons bring,
  Too late, the veritable thing.
  For if (the Poet’s tale of bliss)
  A love, wherewith commeasured this
  Is weak and beggarly, and none,
  Exist a treasure to be won,
  And if the vision, though it stay,
  Be yet for an appointed day,—
  This choice, if made, this deed, if done,
  The memory of this present past,
  With vague foreboding might o’ercast
  The heart, or madden it at last.

    Let Reason first her office ply;
  Esteem, and admiration high,
  And mental, moral sympathy,
  Exist they first, nor be they brought
  By self-deceiving afterthought,—
  What if an halo interfuse
  With these again its opal hues,
  That all o’erspreading and o’erlying,
  Transmuting, mingling, glorifying,
  About the beauteous various whole.
  With beaming smile do dance and quiver;
  Yet, is that halo of the soul?—
  Or is it, as may sure be said,
  Phosphoric exhalation bred
  Of vapour, steaming from the bed
  Of Fancy’s brook, or Passion’s river?
  So when, as will be by-and-by,
  The stream is waterless and dry,
  This halo and its hues will die;
  And though the soul contented rest
  With those substantial blessings blest,
  Will not a longing, half confest,
  Betray that this is not the love,
  The gift for which all gifts above
  Him praise we, Who is Love, the Giver?

    I cannot say—the things are good:
  Bread is it, if not angels’ food;
  But Love? Alas! I cannot say;
  A glory on the vision lay;
  A light of more than mortal day
  About it played, upon it rested;
  It did not, faltering and weak,
  Beg Reason on its side to speak:
  Itself was Reason, or, if not,
  Such substitute as is, I wot,
  Of seraph-kind the loftier lot;—
  Itself was of itself attested;—
  To processes that, hard and dry,
  Elaborate truth from fallacy,
  With modes intuitive succeeding,
  Including those and superseding;
  Reason sublimed and Love most high
  It was, a life that cannot die,
  A dream of glory most exceeding.

  1844


  Farewell, my Highland lassie! when the year returns around,
  Be it Greece, or be it Norway, where my vagrant feet are found,
  I shall call to mind the place, I shall call to mind the day,
  The day that’s gone for ever, and the glen that’s far away;
  I shall mind me, be it Rhine or Rhone, Italian land or France,
  Of the laughings and the whispers, of the pipings and the dance;
  I shall see thy soft brown eyes dilate to wakening woman thought,
  And whiter still the white cheek grow to which the blush was brought;
  And oh, with mine commixing I thy breath of life shall feel,
  And clasp thy shyly passive hands in joyous Highland reel;
  I shall hear, and see, and feel, and in sequence sadly true,
  Shall repeat the bitter-sweet of the lingering last adieu;
  I shall seem as now to leave thee, with the kiss upon the brow,
  And the fervent benediction of—Ὁ Θεὸς μετὰ σοῦ!

  Ah me, my Highland lassie! though in winter drear and long
  Deep arose the heavy snows, and the stormy winds were strong,
  Though the rain, in summer’s brightest, it were raining every day,
  With worldly comforts few and far, how glad were I to stay!
  I fall to sleep with dreams of life in some black bothie spent,
  Coarse poortith’s ware thou changing there to gold of pure content,
  With barefoot lads and lassies round, and thee the cheery wife,
  In the braes of old Lochaber a laborious homely life;
  But I wake—to leave thee, smiling, with the kiss upon the brow,
  And the peaceful benediction of—Ὁ Θεὸς μετὰ σοῦ!


_WIRKUNG IN DER FERNE._

  When the dews are earliest falling,
  When the evening glen is grey,
  Ere thou lookest, ere thou speakest,
  My beloved,
  I depart, and I return to thee,—
  Return, return, return.

  Dost thou watch me while I traverse
  Haunts of men, beneath the sun—
  Dost thou list while I bespeak them
  With a voice whose cheer is thine?
  O my brothers! men, my brothers,
  You are mine, and I am yours;
  I am yours to cheer and succour,
  I am yours for hope and aid:
  Lo, my hand to raise and stay you,
  Lo, my arm to guard and keep,
  My voice to rouse and warn you,
  And my heart to warm and calm;
  My heart to lend the life it owes
  To her that is not here,
  In the power of her that dwelleth
  Where you know not—no, nor guess not—
  Whom you see not; unto whom,—
  Ere the evening star hath sunken,
  Ere the glow-worm lights its lamp,
  Ere the wearied workman slumbers,—
  I return, return, return.



  On the mountain, in the woodland,
  In the shaded secret dell,
      I have seen thee, I have met thee!
  In the soft ambrosial hours of night,
  In darkness silent sweet
      I beheld thee, I was with thee,
      I was thine, and thou wert mine!

  When I gazed in palace-chambers,
  When I trod the rustic dance,
  Earthly maids were fair to look on,
  Earthly maidens’ hearts were kind:
  Fair to look on, fair to love:
  But the life, the life to me,
  ’Twas the death, the death to them,
  In the spying, prying, prating
  Of a curious cruel world.
  At a touch, a breath they fade,
  They languish, droop, and die;
  Yea, the juices change to sourness,
  And the tints to clammy brown;
  And the softness unto foulness,
  And the odour unto stench.
  Let alone and leave to bloom;
  Pass aside, nor make to die,
  —In the woodland, on the mountain,
  Thou art mine, and I am thine.

  So I passed.—Amid the uplands,
  In the forests, on whose skirts
  Pace unstartled, feed unfearing
  Do the roe-deer and the red,
  While I hungered, while I thirsted,
  While the night was deepest dark,
  Who was I, that thou shouldst meet me?
  Who was I, thou didst not pass?
  Who was I, that I should say to thee
  Thou art mine, and I am thine?

  To the air from whence thou camest
  Thou returnest, thou art gone;
  Self-created, discreated,
  Re-created, ever fresh,
  Ever young!——
  As a lake its mirrored mountains
  At a moment, unregretting,
  Unresisting, unreclaiming,
  Without preface, without question,
  On the silent shifting levels
  Lets depart,
  Shows, effaces and replaces!
  For what is, anon is not;
  What has been, again ’s to be;
  Ever new and ever young
  Thou art mine, and I am thine.

  Art thou she that walks the skies,
  That rides the starry night?
  I know not——
  For my meanness dares not claim the truth
  Thy loveliness declares.
  But the face thou show’st the world is not
  The face thou show’st to me;
  And the look that I have looked in
  Is of none but me beheld.
  I know not; but I know
  I am thine, and thou art mine.

  And I watch: the orb behind
  As it fleeteth, faint and fair
  In the depth of azure night,
  In the violet blank, I trace
  By an outline faint and fair
  Her whom none but I beheld.
  By her orb she moveth slow,
  Graceful-slow, serenely firm,
  Maiden-Goddess! while her robe
  The adoring planets kiss.
  And I too cower and ask,
  Wert thou mine, and was I thine?

  Hath a cloud o’ercast the sky?
  Is it cloud upon the mountain-sides
  Or haze of dewy river-banks
  Below?—
  Or around me,
  To enfold me, to conceal,
  Doth a mystic magic veil,
  A celestial separation,
  As of curtains hymeneal,
  Undiscerned yet all excluding,
  Interpose?
  For the pine-tree boles are dimmer,
  And the stars bedimmed above;
  In perspective brief, uncertain,
  Are the forest-alleys closed,
  And to whispers indistinctest
  The resounding torrents lulled.
  Can it be, and can it be?
  Upon Earth and here below,
  In the woodland at my side
  Thou art with me, thou art here.

  ’Twas the vapour of the perfume
  Of the presence that should be,
  That enwrapt me?
  That enwraps us,
  O my Goddess, O my Queen!
  And I turn
  At thy feet to fall before thee;
  And thou wilt not:
  At thy feet to kneel and reach and kiss thy finger-tips;
  And thou wilt not:
  And I feel thine arms that stay me,
  And I feel——
  O mine own, mine own, mine own,
  I am thine, and thou art mine!


_A PROTEST._

  Light words they were, and lightly, falsely said:
  She heard them, and she started,—and she rose,
  As in the act to speak; the sudden thought
  And unconsidered impulse led her on.
  In act to speak she rose, but with the sense
  Of all the eyes of that mixed company
  Now suddenly turned upon her, some with age
  Hardened and dulled, some cold and critical;
  Some in whom vapours of their own conceit,
  As moist malarious mists the heavenly stars,
  Still blotted out their good, the best at best
  By frivolous laugh and prate conventional
  All too untuned for all she thought to say—
  With such a thought the mantling blood to her cheek
  Flushed-up, and o’er-flushed itself, blank night her soul
  Made dark, and in her all her purpose swooned.
  She stood as if for sinking. Yet anon
  With recollections clear, august, sublime,
  Of God’s great truth, and right immutable,
  Which, as obedient vassals, to her mind
  Came summoned of her will, in self-negation
  Quelling her troublous earthy consciousness,
  She queened it o’er her weakness. At the spell
  Back rolled the ruddy tide, and leaves her cheek
  Paler than erst, and yet not ebbs so far
  But that one pulse of one indignant thought
  Might hurry it hither in flood. So as she stood
  She spoke. God in her spoke and made her heard.
